[SYCL][Doc][matrix] Update the experimental matrix interface that mat… (#4707)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/Matrix/dpcpp-joint-matrix.asciidoc

The base pointer determines the starting address of the matrix to be loaded/stored. `layout` determines whether the data are being read/written in a row (`row_major`), column major (`column_major`) fashion, or if the data has already been transformed into VNNI format (`packed_a`, `packed_b`). `stride` describes the number of elements between consecutive rows for row major and packed layout,  columns for column major layout. 

> Note that for getting maximum performance on AMX and DPAS, prepacking data in the memory is necessary. If users did not specify the packed layouts (`packed_a` in column major case, `packed_b` in row major case), transforms done by the implementation will be slow due to extra scatter/gather operations. Hence, we expose these layouts `packed_a` and `packed_b` to the user to specify that A and/or B have already been VNNIed. The packed or VNNI layout is introduced in `VNNI layout` section below.

Reviewer: It is implied in various places that `packed_a` should only be used with matrix A and `packed_b` with matrix_b.  Here it states "`packed_a` in column major case, `packed_b` in row major case".  This gives the impression that matrix A must always be indexed column major and matrix B row_major for AMX and DPAS (at least when they are `packed`).  If what I wrote is correct it would be clearer to state this explicitly, or otherwise clarify the situation.

Since the matrix functions are group operations (as defined in Section 4.17.3 of the SYCL specification), the matrix API has to be accessed by all the work-items in the group in a convergent control flow. The `Group` template argument can be a work-group or a subgroup. These functions will be called once by each work item in the group.

To be aligned with the SYCL 2020 group algorithms, an additional group argument is added to the matrix operations to designate that these functions are collective operations. The {dpcpp} syntax is the following: 

IMPORTANT: In the current implementation, only the subgroup scope is supported.  

#### Load 
```c++
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::matrix {
  template <typename Group, typename T, size_t NumRows, size_t NumCols,
          matrix_layout L,
          access::address_space Space>
  void joint_matrix_load(Group sg, joint_matrix<T, NumRows, NumCols, L, Group> &res,

> 		    multi_ptr<T, Space> src, size_t stride, matrix_layout memL);

Reviewer 2: What's the motivation for changing these names?  I think `Layout` and `layout` were much better names.

The table below provides a description for each of the member variables and type aliases in `tpu_params` class and the forms in which  they are defined.

[frame="none",options="header"]
|======================
| Member/type alias in `tpu_params` | Forms they are defined in |Description
|`type_a`| validation, default values|type alias for the type of matrix A
|`type_b`|  validation, default values|type alias for the type of matrix B
|`type_c`|  validation, default values|type alias for the type of matrix C

> |`defaultM`|  validation, default values, general query|when no sizes are provided by the user, indicates the suggested default size for M; usually this corresponds to the maximum size the implementation supports

Author: I will fix this. 
The change to M,N,K is  in the todo list. I will address it as a separate PR as this needs to change the template parameters names as well.

> |`defaultM`|  validation, default values, general query|when no sizes are provided by the user, indicates the suggested default size for M; usually this corresponds to the maximum size the implementation supports

Reviewer 3: The names of the template parameters isn't really that important because the users never references the parameters by their names.  I think you could use something like `Mval`.

|`defaultN`|  validation, default values, general query|when no sizes are provided by the user, indicates the suggested default size for N; usually this corresponds to the maximum size the implementation supports

> |`defaultK`|  validation, default values, general query|when no sizes are provided by the user, indicates the suggested default size for K; usually this corresponds to the maximum size the implementation supports

Author: That's right, that's why  I had them return -1 to mean these are not defined. 
But I will remove them from the general query for consistency about what not-defined mean

|`joint_matrix_a`|  validation, default values|type alias for `joint_matrix` for matrix A
|`joint_matrix_b`| validation, default values| type alias for `joint_matrix` for matrix B
|`joint_matrix_c`|  validation, default values| type alias for `joint_matrix` for matrix C
|`dynamic_p`| validation, default values, general query| a boolean that indicates whether the implementation supports dynamic sizes (true) or not (false)
|numtiles|  validation, default values, general query|indicates number of tiles in Intel AMX (does not apply to DPAS)
|scope| validation, default values, general query| indicates the memory and execution scope supported by the TPU implementation
|`combination` |  validation, default values, general query|composes the types and sizes of A, B, C matrices allowed in one combination

> |`max_msize`, `max_nsize`, `max_ksize`|  validation, default values, general query|When one of these members is non-zero, it indicates that the TPU supports all element sizes in the range from 1 up to the given value. By contrast, a zero value indicates that the TPU implementation supports only a discrete set of element sizes, which are given by the corresponding msize, nsize, or ksize members

Author: Sounds good

> |`msize`, `nsize`, `ksize`|  validation, default values, general query|presents one of the sizes that the TPU implementation supports 

Author: sounds good

   joint_matrix<int8_t, tK, tN, packed_b> tB(sg);
   joint_matrix<int32_t, tM, tN> tC(sg);
   joint_matrix_load(sg, tC, memC + sg_startx * tM * N + sg_starty/SG_SIZE*tN, N, matrix_layout::row_major);
   for (int k = 0; k < K; k += tk) {
     joint_matrix_load(sg, tA, memA + sg_startx * tM * K + k, K, matrix_layout::row_major);
     joint_matrix_load(sg, tB, memB + k * N + sg_starty/SG_SIZE*tN*4, N*4, matrix_layout::packed_b); // VNNI
     tC = joint_matrix_mad(sg, tA, tB, tC);
   }
   joint_matrix_store(sg, tC, memC + sg_startx * tM * N + sg_starty/SG_SIZE*tN, N, matrix_layout::row_major);
}).wait();
```

== Query Interface
AMX, DPAS and Nvidia TPUs support different sizes and types. 
The query interface is used to validate user code and inform them about supported types, sizes, scope, and layouts by the implementation.
This also offers development and tuning productivity by both scientists and library developers. The query interface we are proposing here is a compile-time query, 
so there will be no runtime errors.   
The query interface proposed here consists of three functionalities:

- At compile time, inform the user whether a specific combination is valid or not.

> - Construct the matrices using a default shape if user does not provide a combination 

Reviewer: For people that aren't aware perhaps clarify that this corresponds to the case where the user provides the sizes of large "tile" matrices but doesn't specify the sizes of corresponding submatrices of the "tiles" - Construct the matrices refers to constructing the submatrices of the matrices whose size the user provided.

  static constexpr std::size_t defaultK = -1;

  bool dynamic_p = false; // should be true in future implementations because
                          // AMX hardware supports dynamic sizes
  uint32_t numtiles = 8;
  scope_t scope = scope_t::sub_group;
  struct combination {
    uint32_t max_msize;
    uint32_t max_nsize;
    uint32_t max_ksize;
    matrix_type atype;
    matrix_type btype;
    matrix_type ctype;
    uint32_t msize;
    uint32_t nsize;
    uint32_t ksize;
  };
  using mt = matrix_type;
  static constexpr combination combinations[] = {
      {16, 16, 64, mt::sint8, mt::sint8, mt::sint32},
      {16, 16, 64, mt::sint8, mt::uint8, mt::sint32},
      {16, 16, 64, mt::uint8, mt::sint8, mt::sint32},
      {16, 16, 64, mt::uint8, mt::uint8, mt::sint32},
      {16, 16, 32, mt::bf16, mt::bf16, mt::fp32}};
  static constexpr int num_combinations =
      sizeof(combinations) / sizeof(combination);
};

enum class tpu {
  dpas,
  amx
};

enum class matrix_type {
bf16,
fp16,
fp19,  // tfloat32
fp32,
fp64,
sint2,
sint4,
sint8,
sint16,
sint32,
sint64,
uint2,
uint4,
uint8,
uint16,
uint32,
uint64
};

enum class scope_t {
sub_group,
work_group
};
}
```

> === Valid or not Example:

Reviewer 2: I found this subsection title a little confusing.  I'm nit-picking, but I don't see any example of querying here, and it's not immediately obvious from this example where the assertion happens.

}
```

### Element Indexing and Element-Wise Operations 
There were multiple options on how to enable this feature.

#### Option 1: Non-restrictive element indexing
Allowing non-restrictive element indexing on the matrix element as shown below would result into slow indexing on the GPU.
 Besides, it will rely heavily on spirv and compiler vectorization:

```c++
matrix<int, 8, 8> C;
for (int i = 0; i < 8; i++) 
 for (int j = 0; j < 8; j++)
   C(i,j) *= alpha; //Align with mdspan
```
#### Option2: Restrictive fast element indexing 
In the DPC++ context, the expectation is that all element-wise operations will happen in a converged control path by all work items in the group.
Option 2 proposes a new set of element-wise operations by overloading existing operations to work on `matrix` object. An example is shown below:
```c++
joint_matrix<ONEAPI::sub_group, int, 8, 8> C(sg);
  C *= alpha; 
```
The problem with this option is that it is restrictive to a very limited set of operations. 

#### Option3: Restrictive conversion in the interface from SIMD to SIMT
Nvidia wmma interface added a new member to `fragment` class to designate the WI owned part of the matrix. 

> While this provides fast element indexing on the GPU compared to the non-restrictive option, the user does not know the mapping of the owned data to the original matrix. This puts restriction on the user to implement new operations like sum of rows of a matrix for quantized algorithms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this provides fast element indexing on the GPU compared to the non-restrictive option, the user does not know the mapping of the owned data to the original matrix.  However using the 'mma' ptx instructions as opposed to the 'wmma' ptx instructions the mapping is known.
```

> #### Option3: Restrictive conversion in the interface from SIMD to SIMT
> Nvidia wmma interface added a new member to `fragment` class to designate the WI owned part of the matrix. 
> While this provides fast element indexing on the GPU compared to the non-restrictive option, the user does not know the mapping of the owned data to the original matrix. This puts restriction on the user to implement new operations like sum of rows of a matrix for quantized algorithms.
> 
> #### proposal: Explicit conversion in the interface from SIMD to SIMT
> We introduce a new function `get_wi_slice` that provides any portion of the matrix that the user wants but in a SIMT array object:.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Option3: Restrictive conversion in the interface from SIMD to SPMD
Nvidia wmma interface added a new member to `fragment` class to designate the WI owned part of the matrix. 
While this provides fast element indexing on the GPU compared to the non-restrictive option, the user does not know the mapping of the owned data to the original matrix. This puts restriction on the user to implement new operations like sum of rows of a matrix for quantized algorithms.

#### proposal: Explicit conversion in the interface from SIMD to SPMD
We introduce a new function `get_wi_slice` that provides any portion of the matrix that the user wants but in a SPMD array object:.
```

SYCL is a Single Program Multiple Data (SPMD) model.
